+++
title = "heartbreak and loathing in scandinavia"
date = 2025-12-06
draft = false

[taxonomies]
tags = ["travel", "dairy"]
+++

A tragicomedy in three acts.

# heartbreak

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/808s.png", alt="", caption="808s and Heartbreak.") }}

My initial idea for this blog post was an extended riff on *Waiting for Godot* crossed with gonzo excerpts of the style of *Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas*, but it proved too formally inventive for the kind of writing I am generally good at: fast-paced, stream-of-consciousness, overly neurotic monologuing. Trying out new things is generally good—more often than not a learning experience—but in the case of writing about heartbreak it carries the risk of turning what is a harrowing experience into intellectual moralizing, which in turn, of course, leads to more heartbreak. It turns out I am no longer interested in performing a dissection of what went wrong™. The official reason for this is because it has a tendency to yield empty results. The real reason is that I’m too tired to do this anymore.

The premise, at the outset, is that I am flying from Paris to Copenhagen after a surreptitiously weird series of escalations with someone I knew who is now downplaying the whole thing for a variety of reasons. I don’t really blame her insofar as I don’t really blame individual people for things—it is much more fruitful and convenient to blame the universe for engineering circumstances that lead to heartbreak rather than the people involved for inducing them. I’m sure the act of platonically feeding me ice cream with a spoon in a Korean café was in good faith. I’ve done this with most of my good friends; and I sleep with all my homies, too, just for the record, and later tell them over coffee that this is perfectly normal and regular among good friends, you know, and you’re really reading into something that’s not there, I swear… and by the way, you mind taking care of my cat next week? Attributing human agency to actions is such a 2014 move.

Besides, to say that I am heartbroken is kind of a misnomer anyway: what I am actually experiencing is a kind of resignation, really, mostly because this was a relationship neutered at the outset, which are things that hit emotionally less brutally but spiritually harder—the thing you have actually lost is the spiritual best possible version of the event, not the messy reality that was not allowed to exist. You don’t really have several heartbreaks in succession, more so just one heartbreak that keeps happening again and again and again, a kind of primordial heartbreak that eats at your bones and gnaws at the part of you that is responsible for regulating things such as self-esteem; the descent into despair is like the descent into that last and final end, an ultimate familiarity punctured by interspersed moments of calm and happiness. It’s kind of like your natural state, and being heartbroken is reclaiming that. “Of course this was going to happen. How could I have ever thought there was more?”

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/yard.jpeg", alt="", caption="Nordre Kirkegård Cemetary.") }}

But, you know, at some point going through these motions becomes more tiresome than harrowing, and it turns from a knife into the heart into death by a thousand cuts, where each new potential relationship feels more like it’s being indulged in purely out of pragmatism rather than joy… you feel less, you care less, and you are less likely to make it successfully work. This was a case a bit like that one, where it wasn’t that I was enamored with this girl, but rather that I was quite fond of her (and in my wary state, thought that if given enough time I would probably grow to *be* enamored). I feel like this stuff about instant connection is a lie that happens to people who have only ever married their high-school girlfriend. That’s not to say that I don’t believe that connections can be strong, but rather that they can develop. And sometimes, like in this case, they’re not really allowed to because people don’t like taking this leap of faith that you kind of have to, but I can’t also really blame them for not because they have previously experienced what seem like certainties turn into something quite mean. But given some time I have no reason to believe that ‘huh, there might actually be something here’ can’t turn into ‘pretty great,’ actually, or even ‘I don’t know what I’d have done without her,’ or even, ‘man, I think she might be the one.’ But at the same time the ‘huh, there might actually be something here’ isn’t good enough in the moment. And it’s all because of this eternal heartbreak that descends and sort of stays there for longer and longer until you’ve been consumed by it and the act of going out with people seems very logistically complex indeed. I’m checking my calendar and I’ve got four potential baby mommas to go for coffee with on Tuesday. I’m a lucky guy.

So what’s the point? The point is that for some reason or the other the universe has decided to be cruel to some people and nice to others, and it has chosen to pick those who it is cruel to seemingly at random. It has been generally nice to me in some ways but quite cruel in the ways that matter, and so I shake my fists at the clouds instead of at the people around me, who are quite nice (and very pretty indeed). The universe thinks it is very funny to turn me into someone resentful, and that is what I mean by ‘heartbreak’ here—not what was induced by the text literally saying ‘I don’t know what we’re doing’ but what was induced by a realization of the fact that there were a series of actions that led to the text being *sent*. I don’t know why things can’t just ‘work out,’ why they have to be so intentional in scope. I don’t want to be the kind of person who says that at this point I’ll take anything, but at this point I’ll take anything.

This is what I’m thinking as I fly out to Denmark and land first in Copenhagen, then in my final destination in Aarhus. This and ‘why’d she have to use tongue, man’ and ‘I was such a fool to get excited’ and ‘you win some, you lose some.’ I am not good at these things. I’m good at feeling good about meeting girls and being a romantic, but not really good at saying things like ‘I like you, but…’, you know, and my friends who’ve had better strokes of fortune remind me relentlessly that they somehow don’t even have to say these things as often as I do. So what fact do I chalk it up to? Because I’ve blamed myself ad infinitum, but I don’t actually think I’ve massively screwed up, or anything. What I end up doing usually is getting resentful at the fact that the universe really wants me to be someone resentful.

But all is not lost, and I have a nice sleep in Aarhus, dreaming of other things (other girls, too, apparently) and when I wake up I listen to *808s and Heartbreak* in a 12th century cathedral while praying to God that something good happen to me. Apparently I am religious. I do not know at what point this happened, but I am. I believe in God. I think he’s out there, and I think he has some kind of vague immersion in my well-being, though I’m not certain if he has an antagonistic role or he’s my homeboy… one of the things I’m pretty conscious about is that things actually don’t happen to me unless I go out and actively pursue them, which points to a somewhat neutral role, but he’s definitely up there, that’s for sure. The hazards in my path to salvation are so well-designed there must have been some sort of consciousness who did it—I can only hope that it’s leading up to some kind of ‘my bravest warriors suffer the most’ sort of thing, but then I remember that there are people out there who have never really have had anything good happen to them, ever, just plowing through shit after shit, although I suppose for those people feeling like shit is mostly just like feeling regular, so they don’t actually know what they’re missing out on.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/city.jpeg", alt="", caption="My Morning Walk.") }}

The music shifts to Bruce Springsteen, I go on a hike, and the thoughts I’m thinking shift steadily to the ‘it is what it is’ variety, and I have the horrifying realization that I am so used to being unhappy that I actually am aware of the sequence of activities I need to perform to get my spirits back up like the back of my hand. Very unfortunate stuff. And just as I’m kind of dozing off and tired on the beach I realize that I don’t feel too bad at all, really, it’s pretty nice weather and the skyline looks quite fine in the distance; I realize that I have successfully coped myself to a neutral state, and that the next time something like this happens I will be better prepared for it than I was this time, so well prepared, in fact, that it will take me no time at all to bounce back, and I will happily accept the heartbreak like a fool on a hill—incapable of feeling sorrow, only joy, very much like those people feeling like shit all the time, not knowing what exactly it is I’m missing out on.

# loathing

Why am I in Aarhus? Because I’ll let you know I have little love for the peoples of Northern Europe beyond one Søren Kierkegaard, appealing as the statistics make them out to be—ultimately the fact that I’m not having the time of my life at Aarhus is some kind of linear combination of my general emotional state (which oscillates between several registers, and so must always be adjusted for) and the actual location itself, which is characteristically not for me. Ordinarily there is nothing of appeal for me here—Copenhagen at least has some *Hamlet* memorabilia. But, by some fluke of the universe, Aarhus was one of the places where cryptography as a thing—*my* thing—came into its own, and therefore occupies quite a special niche in the hearts of those people who make sure that the government can’t read your emails. And those very same people—following a wonderful mishap that was [covered in the *New York Times*](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/11/21/world/cryptography-group-lost-election-results.html) that is still omnipresent in the consciousnesses of everyone here, apparently, since every time I take a picture someone jests “this is going into NYT, guys, smile”—have decided to pay tribute to this old town in Denmark by organizing one of their conferences[^1] here, where I’m giving a presentation.

I have decided, for lack of a better term, that I don’t like conferences. They suck. The problem here is systemic and multifaceted, but the really big one is that the conference is partly an ineffective avenue for dissemination of certain kinds of information, and also a bad place to actually hang out. The biggest issue I have is a social one: these people *feel* like they are my friends and coworkers, but my relationship with them is primarily parasocial; all I know about them stems from academic webpages and the actual technical reports that they write. This means that conversations are often empty and banal and reveal only enough research details that it becomes clear that what they are doing is very fancy and very cool but is in no way useful to you as an individual if you want to contribute to this effort. Ultimately, this is a common issue in academia—academia rewards people who display significant individual marketing prowess and discourages serious collaboration. I do not want to chill with these people I meet at a conference—I don’t know them well enough. This is one of the only venues in my life where I actually have very little interest in the people themselves; if I could replace them with some kind of Chatbot which uses their knowledge and brainpower to answer my specific, targeted questions, I would. It seems very clear that there is a hierarchy, with the famous people at the top and grad students at the bottom, but the way this is enforced is kind of unnatural: the ‘famous people’ are often very nice and helpful, very willing to collaborate and discuss, but also not the people you *really* want to collaborate with anyway—many of them are old, for instance, and can provide expertise but not all that much technical help (especially because they genuinely have a lack of time), while the upcoming superstars who you *do* want to work with have a vested interest in giving you precisely zero details about the research that they are doing.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/statue.jpeg", alt="", caption="Statues on the Promenade.") }}

[Phil Rogaway](https://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/) talks extensively about people doing ‘crypto-for-crypto,’ ie. working on cryptography as a thing unto itself rather than as a tool for serving people, but since we are at the conference precisely designed to facilitate this, I am not going to use this as a tool to complain; and besides, if no one *ever* works on the cool, conceptual, theoretical stuff, we will have nowhere to go as a community[^2]. But a definite problem is that at a lot of these conferences I am confronted by results that I can only describe as ‘crypto-for-paper’—stuff that’s meant to appear at a conference and go nowhere, presumably as a way to pad CVs. There are significant problems with crypto-for-paper, partly because unlike crypto-for-crypto (which presumably at least benefits people *doing* crypto-for-crypto), this provides absolutely no actual *research* to anyone at all.

So what actually are these crypto-for-paper papers? The answer is that they are papers which do not meet the threshold for ‘paper’ as a unit of incremental human knowledge, yet are still written as papers, anyway; the reason they are done so is because you get some cred from landing it at one of these conferences, but the gap between coming up with the result, typing it up and then submitting, getting accepted and presenting is something that is usually at least six months, six months in which you’re significantly further ahead than the ‘competition’ and hence reduce the presentation to a hollow enterprise. This is not always true—a lot of people don’t really work on a problem again until it’s published—but it is true very often for the kind of papers which are make-or-break and cause actual problems with collaboration, ‘holy grail’ results and the like. To be honest, it seems to me that the way a paper should proceed is via some kind of online journal, where whoever has an idea just puts it up on a forum with all the technical details of the argument, and everyone else joins in and makes the necessary edits, brainstorms new ideas, and when you finally have a substantial result, submit it to a conference with the twenty or so people who contributed to it—similar to the polymath stuff that the mathematicians are doing. I mean, this *is* exactly the kind of thing the internet was meant to facilitate: break down borders, and all that. 

Obviously there are problems with this. And they are simple ones: I’m not [Ryan Williams](https://people.csail.mit.edu/rrw/), I am stupider, and so it is only natural that I want access to his brain and not the other way around. But it is still worth thinking why these things are the way they are and why it’s been so hard to change them. There was the feedback session, where a large topic of discussion was whether to increase or decrease the number of papers that are accepted next year, because submission rates are increasing exponentially. I think the general suggestion was ‘let’s do this based on vibes.’ On one hand, I respect this—just letting the next years’ program chairs deal with this is definitely not the worst solution; I honestly don’t think this is that consequential of a thing anyway (except logistically, but I’m not the one organizing these things), because I have no reason to doubt that my papers (which are good) will inevitably end up getting accepted somewhere, and I do think that most papers of merit eventually end up at some good conference even if they have to suffer through a few cycles’ worth of rejections. But it seems to me that one of the factors that should go into this decision is what impact increasing or decreasing the submission rate has on the *correctness* of papers submitted. Because a lot of papers that make their way to these conferences are wrong[^3]; just look at [this paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/1749) which was at this TCC, pointing out the incorrectness of a paper published at S&P 2021 which literally contains a technique to improve signatures which is now being used as a consideration by NIST while standardizing more PQ signature schemes. There’s nothing wrong with the fact that the authors of the S&P paper made a mistake. Everyone makes mistakes. The problem is with the fact that this wasn’t caught by the S&P program committee during the review process, which is literally what the review process is *for*—the job isn’t a simple ‘yes’ or ‘no,’ but rather an interactive process of improvement that ensures that the version that actually makes it into the proceedings is the best version of the paper.

The actual talks themselves vary significantly in quality: sometimes the speaker isn’t great, which is unfortunate, and sometimes the talks themselves are unfocused, overly technical, or whatnot—I feel like they should often be akin to lecture to be useful, but even just as brief highlights of the paper there are talks which fail to provide any excitement. It is evidently clear that many of the people giving the talk don’t want to give talks. They are often very nervous—which is understandable, but in this case there should be mechanisms to account for this; for example, get someone else to give the talk. I’ve occasionally seen people who aren’t even authors give talks if the authors weren’t able to make it to the conference[^4]. But a good speaker can genuinely do wonders for the paper; there was a talk at this conference by [Henry Corrigan-Gibbs](https://people.csail.mit.edu/henrycg/) which is essentially the gold standard of talk—‘here’s my result, here’s why you should care, this is what you should work on’—and generated enough interest that I went and read the paper and started brainstorming immediately. Stating it this way makes it seem extremely basic of a criterion, but most talks barely meet any of these standards. And I understand: it’s imposing to give a good talk when there are top people sitting in front of you vetting what you’re saying. But this should make it even easier; if you have ten minutes then there’s no point explaining the finer details, and your paper’s already been accepted anyway and is worth being at the conference, so why fumble with the talk? Just take a loudspeaker and yell ‘look—this is worth caring about, and this is why.’ At this point I’ll take any talk which does this. And honestly, it’s nice when authors brag a little bit about their paper. ‘Hey guys, just so you know, this is good research. This matters.’

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/lights.jpeg", alt="", caption="Christmas Lights.") }}

But that’s just the main program. There are other talks in this conference: three big ones, in fact, all of which are notable and interesting. First, a talk about the modern frontiers of complexity theory and why they are relevant to cryptography by [Roei Tell](https://sites.google.com/site/roeitell/). I don’t know if the stuff he talks about is super-relevant to cryptography because he only has one substantial example—this thing about targeted hitting-set-generators being equivalent to correlation-intractable hash[^5]—but in any case, (a) it absolutely is good to know what the complexity theorists are doing because it often *is* super-relevant to cryptography, and (b) this is TCC, and so this is perfectly appropriate. The second is the Test of Time Award talk, which is about something technical about signatures that is also obviously deserved. The third talk is titled ‘Cryptography for AI’ and is somewhat bizarre; I am legitimately unsure as to what is happening here and serves as a representative of a much bigger problem: the community trying to be apolitical when it is a field which was literally invented to make sure that people can’t spy on you.

The overall position of people in this field towards AI is not good. Look—I’m going to be real; I don’t like AI as it exists today, so let me get all the esoterica and my philosophical arguments out in a footnote[^6]. But what the ‘representative, broader’ community thinks is something as follows: AI is a thing that is happening, and so we need to get on it. This is ridiculous. No we don’t, and we certainly don’t need to incorporate AI in our work. The talk in question literally began with strawman proclamations about AI being a ‘divisive’ technology that has some people believing that it’s going to change the world while other people believing that it’s going to destroy it, and then pivoted to saying that what we should be doing is taking advantage of the fact that AI is here while not caring about either of these things. Unfortunately, this is exactly what the broader research community thinks, and the way they think this way is obvious—an insidious combination of crypto-for-paper and DJB-style concerns. If the material value of papers is tied simply to the fact that they ‘engage’ with AI in some capacity (the papers actually highlighted in this talk are kind of tangentially related to LLMs; what they actually are are some mathematical considerations that have relationships with the mathematics of ML) then that provides that much more of an avenue for getting papers accepted to these conferences. Hence the talk—hey, we’re doing this now, so everybody should get in on it, because that way we all find a new thing to write papers about. Meanwhile, the NSF now sees that you’re doing something related to ‘AI’ and drops a bunch of cash on you while you spend your time doing everything but finding quasipolynomial-time algorithms for factoring or actually coming up with a good PQ signature for once. If you’re lucky you get hired by OpenAI and become a cultist[^7].

This is what I mean by not good. This is not how anything is done. This is intellectually lazy and selfish and completely against the spirit of cryptography. Cryptography is not an establishment tool—it is a field that is innately tied to its ethics, and those ethics absolutely incorporate resistance to mass surveillance technologies. This is a technology that is systematically stealing [literally all your shit](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2025/sep/10/tech-companies-are-stealing-our-books-music-and-films-for-ai-its-brazen-theft-and-must-be-stopped). A mass-surveillance technology that eats trees for breakfast and pukes out mass unemployment. From the cryptographic perspective it at least makes sense for people to start thinking of Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning or something similar, but because that whole project is going practically nowhere the cool new thing is to just join them if you can’t beat them. It’s so easy, isn’t it? So convenient, so simple. And we all get our money and go to sleep with our bellies full.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/ocean.jpeg", alt="", caption="The View from the Bay.") }}


# scandinavia

So besides all the coffee breakups and the papers the real reason I was excited to go on this trip is because I would finally get the opportunity to see the supposed homogenous, socialist utopia termed the ‘Nordic countries.’ My initial impression is already suspect; the bus ride from the airport to the city center (where my hotel rests) arouses in me a pretty nasty observation—this place looks an awful lot like Minnesota. This is a very scary thought. The implication that Minneapolis may be the ultimate peak of the human project is deeply unnerving—looking out the window it appears that the Danes seem to have appropriated the strip mall, which would identify it as one of the true pinnacles of American cultural export. And here I had spent most of my adult life believing that it was chicken and waffles.

Part of it may just be that I’m thinking about a girl and that it’s winter. But it is also immediately clear that the first thing that earmarks this place as not for me is the fact that it is not a place very conducive to doing things like endlessly ruminating over a hot girl in my hotel room—the characteristic Paris feeling, if I may, staring out over the Eiffel Tower in the distance which somehow seems distant and solitary when composed with the image of my hand on her back while she’s cooking. In Aarhus I just feel stupid doing something like this, which is perhaps whatever *hygge* the Danish claim to have perfected. In fact, I feel stupid doing anything but lying around drinking beer while thinking of nothing in particular. This act—of drinking—is one that seems to have precisely zero connotation in this strange land. These guys just seem to do it as, like, a thing that they do. Seventeen in America, chugging down a Coors Light, sipping wine in Paris, pre-gaming raves with vodka in Romania—drinking here has no such connotation. It’s just an activity. Time has stopped. It a state of eternal hazy evening, and every such activity that I do has no particular weight to it at all, and the image of her dark brown eyes manifests more as a sort of editorialized photographic memory than something that can induce suicide attempts.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/cars.jpeg", alt="", caption="Old Cars.") }}

In the evening I am invited by a conference attendee to go out to dinner with her, and we make perfectly functional conversation in a Chinese restaurant. Spelling out the things I am doing in this manner feels very eerie—eating at a Chinese restaurant, which is oddly enough very good, authentic Chinese stuff (some of the best I’ve had, really) while also being somewhat soul-crushing in experience. For example none of the chefs or the servers are Chinese; they’re all Danes, and when I ask for some tap water they inform me that I have to pay for water, actually, and several minutes later when it is quite clear that I’m not going to pay for water the pretty server comes to me, gives me a wink and deposits a glass of water in front of me anyway, grinning, and though such acts of simple human connection are vitalizing in their effect, it stands to reason that some socialist utopia this is if they don’t even have free water. The other thing that they don’t have, as I discover later that night, is a postal service, which has been completely privatized; apparently to send a postcard to the States I need to download some kind of app and get a stamp printed, which I’m in no mood to do. I just abandon my effort. If they don’t even have a post office, they don’t want me sending any mail, and I’m too tired to be a rebel against the system after the flight.

The next day I’m more composed and decide to go for a nice hike—walking through downtown, first, then along the coastline of the bay through a cute little forest-cum-hiking ground (the whole endeavor which culminated in my religious conversion, as I described previously), but even in this state I cannot fail to notice that the lack of Chinese chefs isn’t an anomaly, it’s basically all that’s going on here. The underlying question, of course, is why the hell these people even need Chinese food. What’s going on here? And it’s not just Chinese—somehow this vague village-city off the North Sea has a slew of very good, authentic restaurants from around the world. I’d like to be charitable and say that this is because they have unfortunately awful native food (one of the lunches we got at the conference was literally a slice of toast with beets, uncooked bacon and a side of pig fat), and that certainly seems to be one imperative, but the absence of authentic culture while having exceptionally representative samples of the corresponding food is just very unnerving. It makes sense that New York City has great Chinese food; it’s got a Chinatown, and a zillion Chinese people. Here, on the other hand, the Danes seem to have provided themselves with these things without any of the baggage associated with it. You get the food, but none of the Confucianism. I feel like this is not a bargain that should be allowed to be made. The imported culture here is all performance; there are very few immigrants. Denmark is Denmark, so it feels a bit rich making widespread statements about a group of people who probably just want to eat some nice Chinese food. I get it. I do too. But if this is how the Nordic exceptionalists view the act of multiculturalism, then it seems woefully tone-deaf: we get all the nice things about your culture except the things that make it what it is.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/candy.jpeg", alt="", caption="Peppermint and Licorice.") }}

I’ve walked across Aarhus in about an hour and a half, which is not nearly enough time to subdue my instinctual *Thunder Road* demeanor; the claustrophobia hits, and all I’m thinking is ‘we need to get out of this town, Mary, get in my car and let the wind blow through your hair, it’s a town full of losers, I’m pulling out of here to win’: ultimately I’m insufferable, because even though this is my jam, it’s also my *thing*, and so uncharitability is just the natural way I’m going to proceed here. For lunch I have a pizza roll, which is very good, and therefore I hate it. The streets are extremely walkable. The city is very beautiful. The nature is stunning. Everything is conspiring against me, denying me the romantic longing I so bluntly desire from my environment. They’ve put up cute little Christmas lights everywhere, one of the few artifacts that feels like it really belongs here—looking at the street I am convinced that Christmas is a Danish thing, you know, co-opted by the rest of us; if Santa does ever pop down anywhere it’s here that he pops down, right in the middle of the cold and Andersen’s dark forests. At the very least I can’t hear a whiff of Mariah Carey anywhere. My initial impulse, that this is not the kind of place where it is possible to fall in love, is then incorrect—love here is more of teenagers buying each other peppermint and old people sitting together in a cozy armchair than holding up a boombox outside her window. Of course, this renders my being here somewhat Martian-like, kind of shellshocked at the pedestrian crossing lights with vikings on them—it seems to me that the Danish seem to perform their own culture, as well, as some kind of in-joke (look! we used to be vikings!) 

The actual conference takes place at this recreation of an ancient Danish village called *Den Gamle By*, which is basically an open-air museum that is supposed to simulate the feeling of being in Denmark in the fourteenth century. Conceptually, this is very gross. The French would find the act of turning their culture into a theme park quite appalling—you want French culture, you live in it, and the act of celebration is the act of existing in Paris.

*Den Gamle By*, like Aarhus, is pristine in terms of cleanliness, which I now realize is not a quality I value at all. The sublimity of the Pantheon only hits when you’ve spent the rest of your time in Paris wading through cigarette smoke. I don’t mind things being dirty or unclean. It implies that there are people around, people who have their own thoughts and opinions, people who have differing motivations have all ‘made it’ to one of the world’s cosmopolitan centers for some reason or the other. Dirt is the sign of conflict. The absence of it might give you Minnesota, but not NYC. The other notable thing about *Den Gamle By* is the fact that it’s an intentional recreation of the past—you can walk into an apothecary-like store and buy, for instance, black licorice and a big bar of peppermint, both of which I spent the better part of the evening munching on. 

So there I am, sitting at a conference lunch, idly dipping some cookies in milk and feeling enraged at this Danish facade of cultural performance to cover up for the lack of authenticity that comes from *lived* cultural experience—finding it annoying that their engagement with the past is as this quirky object of reverence and that they possess the privilege to ignore the nastiness that comes with the lost futures of the past haunting modern existence, each existence an anti-existence—annoyed that here is a group of people for which the great war really did end, instead of turning unto itself as a self-battle on an ideological field—when I am struck with the observation that it’s not just the Danish, but the Americans which perform their own culture, too, and yet I am willing to cut *them* an infinitude of slack for the exact sort of thing that I am blatantly accusing the Danish of. “USA NUMBER ONE” isn’t an authentic truth-chant, it’s parodic with everyone being in on the joke; the American performance of baseball and apple pie and highways is even more garish than the peppermint I’m buying here, for instance, or the street performer winding up a music box out in the alleyway. If anything, there is something rather sweet about how the Danish at least indulge in this performance as a fun source of fascination rather than a dream to live or die by. I try for a while to wrestle with this contradiction, but ultimately there’s a haunting point I keep coming back to—I’ve been to Disneyland, and honestly, *Den Gamle By* is a hell of a lot better than Disneyland. It’s what Disneyland might be like if it were, well, good. I hate the fact that I actually *like* being here. I am very much enjoying this foray into Danish history. I find it fun and I find it quite nice, and they even have a recreation of a Blockbuster here, along with an old store selling CRT TVs that is part of their ‘Denmark in the ‘70s’ bit on the far side of the park. And I am liking every one of these things.

{{ figure(src="https://matcauthon49.github.io/assets/blog/aarhus/bb.jpeg", alt="", caption="A Blockbuster!") }}

How improbable! I went for a hike in the forest and it was quite beautiful, really, and though the conference lunch was atrocious Danish originals I went and bought a cheeseburger, later, and was embittered by how good it was compared to the average cheeseburger you can buy in the US. The fact is that I have been quite liking Aarhus. It is a nice, sensitive place full of people who don’t actually care all that much, a quality that I would like to find admirable but is always alienating to me in practice. That evening there is a musical performance at the conference by one of the organizers and the head of the Aarhus Cryptography Department, and it’s a Beatles concert, and I ask them to play *Norwegian Wood*, and they do, and later we talk about how the *In My Life* solo is studio trickery and notoriously hard to pull off on guitar. For dinner we go to an art museum and are served champagne and a three-course meal, and I’m seated next to a guy from Virginia who’s now at Princeton along with a Chinese girl at UVA, and we have a long conversation about how she had a hard time finding an American name and ultimately decided against it, rationalists, sports and frat bros. The other day I had gone home annoyed by how a group of people I had gone out to dinner with were very much dismissive of my obsession with football, considering sports as a ‘dumb person’ activity—dumb not in the sense of low intelligence, which doesn’t affect me whatsoever, but in the sense of ‘not a true member of the community,’ which is deeply annoying as a charge when levied against you. But we talked, yes, about experiences at the Ohio State vs Michigan Game, driving, and many, many other things, and we disagreed on food but it was fine, and later the UVA girl introduced me to her advisor and we talked and he was very nice and explained to me something crucial about a paper I was having confusion with. And later I met some nice girls from Italy who were kind of thrilled to even be there, and it was endearing and exciting; we ate peppermint and made some ribbon ornaments, and at the end of the night I went home thinking that maybe these people aren’t so bad after all—maybe the only people I dislike are the annoying ones from Boston, and, DARPA grifters as they are, who cares about what they think, anyway?

Then I have a good nights’ sleep and on the last day I’m there and decide to go for a walk—it’s raining, like always, but it’s not fair blaming the people or the city for the weather; Aarhus may be a perfectly nice place but it’s not for me—I’m Paris through-and-through, but accusing a place of not being Paris isn’t being fair, is it? And on this walk I remember the picturesque manner in which I perceived those eyes—once removed from their vitality—and they seemed quite innocent indeed instead of sultry this morning. I start to feel, for the first time, that the problem might actually not be in those eyes at all. Maybe what happened was really just two people were confused and couldn’t work it out and the universe didn’t have anything to do with it at all. It’s a disconcerting thought. My schtick about primordial heartbreak is nice to reason about, and I had thought that I had successfully coped myself back to neutral, but only now in the dull rain do I start feeling that maybe the numbness was not really the endpoint, but it was whatever vague positivity I have now. Maybe this was just, like, a regular heartbreak, and I was unhappy, and despite everything I had a good time at the conference and it was fun, and the musical performances were great and endearing—I had good conversations with people who were very much interesting, and there were nice talks—and maybe Aarhus isn’t my favorite city but the Danes really do have *something* going on, you know, even if it’s self-reported happiness; that being at peace is perhaps unnatural to my own state of being but there are people out there somehow making it work. And I was invited to come back in the summer for a research visit, and it looks like—somehow, against the will of every voluntary neuron that I have power over—that I might actually want to when there’s better weather, and I might have a good time after all. And sitting in Copenhagen Airport, on my way back, the most frighting thought of all passes through my mind—that it might just all be okay.



[^1]: This is *TCC 2025*, the Theory of Cryptography Conference, 2025. This is a pretty interesting conference, and ideally should serve as a containment zone—cryptographers love writing papers about things that are quite impractical in real life, and there’s longstanding problems with the fact that these very impractical, theoretical considerations are often what have a chokehold on most cryptography conferences to the point where [certain people](https://cr.yp.to/djb.html) think that this is all some kind of giant conspiracy theory engineered by the NSA to ensure that people don’t actually work on problems of their interest, such as, for instance, trying to break their encryption, or secure everyone else from their surveillance. I personally tend to agree with these theories more than most. TCC is where cryptographers can let their hair down and have a bit of fun, and because of this it makes for a really good experience… as much as I hate to say it, these useless ‘pure theory’ style problems are very fun, and even the detractors would agree.

[^2]: There is actually substantive merit to us not going anywhere as a community. Unlike a lot of other fields of computer science or mathematics, it would actually be highly useful to the world if crypto were solved. And, in reality, crypto *is* solved, at least for the time being—you don’t need anything other than [AES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Encryption_Standard), [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm), and [SHA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure_Hash_Algorithms) in the real world. There is an argument to be made that everything else is superfluous nonsense. This is definitely reductive (all of cryptography cannot be reduced to these three things) but it is not a stupidly weak argument, or anything. Unfortunately, people had to go out there and make quantum computers, which break all our shit. This has led to a cascading expanse of new encryption schemes, signatures, conspiracy theories, attacks, standards, and so on and so forth, and crucially we don’t even have a quantum computer yet. 

[^3]: The usual answer to this, of course, is that papers which are of import that end up being incorrect are usually discovered to be incorrect: this paper, for instance, which pointed out the incorrectness of the original paper after a grand span of four years. Hence, the argument says, the job of a reviewer is mostly to highlight papers which are potentially important to the community and deserve a shot at getting further recognition via conference. But this seems superfluous unless there’s some kind of official retraction process, which there isn’t. There are papers out there which proceed as follows: ‘hey I constructed this cool new thing’ -> ‘sorry, it was wrong’ -> ‘hey, I fixed it’ -> ‘whoops, wrong again, but definitely fixed it this time’ and so on and so forth, each of these intermittent papers being published in a top conference by the same authors. This is different from someone proposing something and it later getting cryptanalyzed; what I mean is that there are cases in which, like, the security proofs are wrong, not their underlying mathematical assumptions which are later broken. Be a reviewer. Do your job. Check the proofs.

[^4]: This is another common point of discussion—whether authors of accepted papers should be forced to make it to the conference. The unsaid problem here is that Americans don’t want to go to Europe and Europeans don’t want to go to America. But a conference is a bargain—you are getting a service from the conference (your paper is being highlighted) in exchange for your duty to the conference (go present it). Like, you can’t avail the services of Eurocrypt if you don’t want to go to Europe—literally don’t submit there if you’re not planning to go. Usually this is solved by sending your grad student, which is a fair compromise. But the problem has been significantly exacerbated these days because of all the politics. It now makes sense for people to not want to leave. I don’t know how to solve this problem. Either way, people with weak passports are screwed.

[^5]: The first is a thing that they’ve used in complexity theory recently to get some great results, while the other is an object that is essentially used to prove that certain primitives like NIZKs (non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs, used by blockchain people) are secure. This is a genius observation.

[^6]: It is genuinely bizarre to me that there are guys out there who love AI because they want to use it to solve the Riemann Hypothesis or something. How presumptuous! Generations of people lived and died not knowing the proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem; that’s just how things are, and creating superintelligence to solve a problem that has required centuries of meditative understanding even to phrase correctly is like snorting a bunch of coke and breaking the 100m dash record. That’s not the point. If that happens the consequence will be that I will no longer have any interest in the Riemann Hypothesis. The reason we do math is not to solve hard problems. I am more sympathetic to researchers trying to use AI to solve the ‘bad’ problems that we need in the real world for practical reasons: trying to find out if LWE has a quantum algorithm, for instance, but this is still suspicious. Ultimately it seems to me that if you care so much about security that you want to invent superintelligence to solve it for you then your time is probably better spent blowing up data centers or campaigning for governments to actually use the stuff we are creating. Your AI is not going to fix the fact that the EU now wants everybody to age-verify everything that they do online, or the fact that we let Google drive a car and take pictures of literally every place on earth. These are far more important privacy concerns than your cryptography that is not even being used nor will be used.

[^7]: I am not kidding. These guys are lizards worshipping their ASI god.