+++
title = "some irrational thoughts about the absurdity of existence"
date = 2025-12-21
draft = true

[taxonomies]
tags = ["literature", "movies", "analysis"]
+++

One of the reasons why I want to write about *The Stranger* is because I want to recount here an experience a friend of mine had while watching the latest attempt at an adaptation in theatres—this time by François Ozon titled simply *L’Étranger* and starring Benjamin Voisin staring moodily into the distance over a white, sun-soaked background:

> It was so strange—there’s a scene in the film where the protagonist and his girlfriend are sitting in a movie theater and watching a film and they start passionately kissing, and I was there with a friend of mine, and we were doing the exact same thing—man and woman, watching a movie—and I felt very awkward and strange, almost propelled to kiss the girl next to me seemingly for no reason apart from replicating whatever it was we were watching on screen; I could tell that she was having the same experience, shifting nervously to the right of me, and yet until then I had held no romantic feelings towards her whatsoever… we were friends, that was it, and I had no desire to breach that boundary, and yet during that moment it felt only natural to complete whatever evolution had been taking place.

I had an academic understanding of Camus’s philosophy for some time now, but I only really got around to reading *The Stranger* a few weeks ago—my experience being that it was almost exactly what I expected, albeit quite a bit funnier. I tried discussing this with my usual group of people but most of them were kind of awestruck that I found any humor in this whole experience, and were also surprised that the humor I found was also somewhat mean-spirited; it seemed to me that they were not quite certain as to what to think about Meursault, whereas to me it was clear that I quite liked the guy. Because of that, the disjoint between what was occurring and his deeply disproportionate responses was to me rather funny; for example, consider the situation in which his girlfriend proposes to marry him:

> That evening Marie carne by to see me and asked me if I wanted to marry her. I said it didn't make any difference to me and that we could if she wanted to. Then she wanted to know if I loved her. I answered the same way I had the last time, that it didn't mean anything but that I probably didn't love her. “So why marry me, then?” she said. I explained to her that it didn't really matter and that if she wanted to, we could get married. Besides, she was the one who was doing the asking and all I was saying was yes. Then she pointed out that marriage was a serious thing. I said, “No.” She stopped talking for a minute and looked at me without saying anything. Then she spoke. She just wanted to know if I would have accepted the same proposal from another woman, with whom I was involved in the same way. I said, “Sure.”

To me, this is deeply hilarious, but in a very unsubtle, almost Abbott-and-Costello-like manner—the fact that one of the most important decisions of her life is something that is essentially of no consequence to him and he communicates it to be so is very funny. Most of the other people I discussed it with found it quite horrifying—it seems that what they got from this interaction was a sense of disconcert rather than any amount of humor. As I said, the humor is primarily unsubtle in nature, and requires taking the situation at face value rather than empathizing with any of these people. To successfully do this, of course, requires some measure of being *like* the absurd man, and is probably more evident if you have an understanding of Camus is trying to do before even reading the book; otherwise, you will probably instead be very put off by the narrator’s nonchalance towards life-and-death matters. 

I like to think about the inherent humor in *The Stranger* as something not very different from what Wallace tries to communicate in [*Laughing with Kafka*](https://harpers.org/archive/1998/07/laughing-with-kafka/), originally published in Harper’s Magazine in 1998, in which Wallace bemoans the difficult task of trying to explain to American college students why Kafka is funny, and why this task is inherently difficult (it turns out that I was trying to do something similar in explaining why *The Stranger* is funny, and the manner I was going about this is also not particularly different). In some sense, he concludes, it is actually quite good that Americans do not find Kafka immediately funny[^1]. 

# new jersey

Quite a bit has been written (unfairly, I might add: I’m on the defensive here) about the 2004 film *Garden State*, written and directed by Zach Braff. The usual complaints can probably be summarized by my instinctive attempt at a rebuttal to them: (a) I don’t actually think this guy sucks, at all—he has problems, sure, but there’s nothing fundamentally pathetic or suckish about him, and really the way he exists is quite regular, and (b) I think Natalie Portman’s character is quite maligned here for no good reason, honestly, and not only do I think she’s not meant to be conventionally desirable, but she’s also not the catalyst for the protagonist’s attempt at self-improvement—even if she were removed from the film entirely I suspect the way events would play out would result in him ‘growing up,’ anyway, with some support from his friends and his doctor. Honestly she’s rather sad and pitiable, which makes their eventual love story quite endearing and believable; if anything, it really feels like she’s the lucky one here to get a guy like him to actually love and appreciate her (it’s a delicate balancing act because this could come off as Braff attempting to write himself as the greatest guy on earth, as writer-directors of this nature have a tendency to do, but he doesn’t—he remains flawed enough that he really just comes off as a guy who had to do a little bit of growing up to become alright, which is the sweet spot).

This is enough material for a long, evidence-based rant. And sometimes I am actually tempted to do these, human as I am, but what prevents me is an unfortunate proclivity I share with Meursault—that my mental state is often a function of my immediate comforts and discomforts, and thus my attempts at writing a cohesive ‘blog’ are cut short by the fact that things actually happen to me in the real world, and so whenever I partake in such an endeavor the natural culmination is that the ‘diary’ aspect of this thing comes pouring forth. Naturally, there are things on my mind, and these things today have led me to a much more balanced and provocative line of thinking: that a true defense of *Garden State* comes from the fact that, in many ways, it is dealing with things not all that different from those dealt by *The Stranger*.



[^1]: A lot of which ultimately comes down to the fact that Kafka isn’t made for any audience which has the psychological makeup of the Charlie Brown style of American, who imbues within himself this ‘nobility of the unintelligent’ that Wallace was so concerned with in works like *Infinite Jest*. How this manifests is that the stereotypical American has within himself several strong defenses against the pathologies that Kafka or Camus are trying to diagnose. This quality is almost Nietzschean in nature: the gap between thinking and doing is essentially zero for this demographic, and the modes of existence which the protagonist of *Metamorphosis* basks in are therefore alien; the novella takes place largely in the mind. Whether this demographic actually exists is another question; Wallace was also concerned with the ‘intelligent, sensitive quarterback,’ for instance, a somewhat paradoxical way of being, but also probably more true-to-life. People contain multitudes. They may not get Kafka, but they’re probably going to cry their hearts out to *The Grapes of Wrath*[^2].

[^2]: Which is to say that Kafka people probably don’t get all that there is to get in Steinbeck, either. I can walk this line because I am at the precise intersection of this demographic. My polar opposite, of course—the person I cannot understand the appeal of whatsoever—is McCarthy.